Hey guys, welcome back to another
tutorial. My name is Jake and today
we're going to be taking a look at this
cool car flip explosion shot we can make
using some new exciting assets from
Production Crate. So, let's take a look
at what we're going to be
creating. All right, so there we go.
Lots of fun to put together. The first
thing we're going to talk about is
pre-planning your effects and your stock
assets and then shooting your plate with
those in mind so that way they work
together well. And then after that,
we're going to dive into After Effects
and go over all the basic compositing
techniques that go into putting
something like this together. So without
any further ado, let's go ahead and get
right into it. All right, so here we are
in Adobe After Effects. As you can see,
I already have a couple things imported.
The first thing we're going to go over
is our primary shot. As you can see, we
got my buddy Josiah here. He's
pretending to shoot the car. It whips
around and then he observes the crash
happening behind him. One of the main
things I want to go over in this
tutorial is how we planned to shoot this
with our asset in mind rather than just
going out filming our take and then
figuring it out later. I knew from the
beginning I wanted to use one of these
really cool new car crash elements found
on Production Crate. And initially this
one caught my eye. crash SUVA cam D
where it flies in, crashes, and rolls
away from the camera. That gave me the
idea to first have an excuse for the car
to fly up into the air and then we could
switch out to this asset halfway through
for it to come crashing back down. Now,
fortunately, also on production crate is
a whole slew of vehicle models,
including this modern SUV, which appears
to be the same one that's used for this
simulation. So that's going to allow us
to bring this in and do a quick little
3D animation and transition almost
seamlessly to this asset. So with that
in mind, I made this little animatic
inside of Cinema 4D to show off how
something like this could potentially
work. First, he shoots, the car flies
into the air and off screen. And then
later in the back half of the clip, it
comes crashing back down, switched out
with our pre-rendered element. Now,
doing an animatic like this is a little
bit overkill, but it did help us figure
out what we wanted the timing to be, as
well as point out a few indicators on
how we could make this work better. The
two main things you're going to notice
about this asset that we selected is
that a it's filmed from a low angle. So,
if we wanted to composite this into a
shot where, say, we were filming from a
rooftop and there was a car crashing on
the street below, it wouldn't quite work
since the virtual camera that's filming
this shot is set at a pretty low angle.
The second is if you check out the
lighting on this car, it does appear to
be outside in a bright sunny
environment. So with our relative camera
movement figured out, we could film in a
bright sunny environment and make sure
that the camera stays nice and low so
that this asset can blend nicely when
we're ready to use it. And so now that
we have our shot all ready to go, we can
go ahead and drag it down here to this
icon to start working in a new
composition. Now, the first section of
this tutorial is going to quickly cover
adding in our 3D driving car that
explodes and flies out of frame. I'm
personally going to be doing this inside
of Cinema 4D, but you can use Blender,
you can use Element 3D, you can use
After Effects's built-in 3D system that
they have now. It's really up to you as
a lot of these steps are going to be the
same across different platforms. Now,
since the camera doesn't have too much
3D movement and it's mostly just a whip
pan, we're going to be able to get away
with using a simple point track on this
and we won't have to worry about any 3D
camera solves. So, for my first step,
I'm going to select our shot and then
add an effect called Mocha AE. Now, we
can click this big button to launch the
Mocha AE window. Go ahead and press
start and we're going to bring our
playhead back to the beginning. Let's
come up here and grab the X spline tool
and draw a little shape around the
distant part of the road. Maybe about
here. Now we can click this button to
analyze forward. At a certain point when
it's no longer able to find the road,
it's going to give you this error that
says tracking terminated prematurely.
That's okay. You can just click okay to
this. And this will be enough data to
get us started. So let's exit out of
this. Don't forget to press save. Now we
can come up here to layer, go to new,
and choose null object. Now back on our
car crash shot in the effects controls,
we can go down to the tracking data
dropdown. Click create track data. You
should see all of these highlight
indicating that there are now key
frames. So we can change the export
option from corner pin to transform and
then change the layer export from none
to our new null that we made and then
click apply. Now if we take a look at
this null, it should be following our
road up to a certain point when it no
longer tracks. Looks like right here
frame 75 is when we lose it. So let's go
to the very last frame when it's
tracked. Select our null and hit U on
the keyboard. Now we can delete all of
the key frames that follow frame 75 as
we don't need those. And now using page
up and page down on the keyboard to go
frame by frame. Let's go one frame at a
time and match where this null should be
on the road manually. You'll notice
there's a little motion tile on the edge
of this because I did previously go
through and stabilize and time remap
this clip. But go ahead and ignore that
for now since we're going to scale this
up when we add camera shake later. Now,
once we're happy with the way our null
is moving, let's go ahead and grab a
frame probably right around here for us
to use as our background plate inside of
Cinema 4D. So, we can come up here to
composition, choose save frame as file.
I'm going to change the output from
Photoshop sequence to PNG. We can click
here to give it an output destination
and a new name. I'm going to call this
back plate and then hit render. Now,
here in Cinema 4D, the first thing we're
going to do is add our back plate. So,
if you hit shift C, you'll bring up the
search window and you can type in
background to find this background
object. Double click this to add it to
your object stack. And then let's create
a new classic material. If you don't see
the materials, you can click this button
to toggle them on and off. Come to
create, go to classic materials, and
select new standard material. Double
click this material and we can rename it
to BG for background. Go to the color
tab and then select this big box next to
texture. Navigate to where you rendered
that back plate. select it and hit open.
So, let's close this out and add our
background material to our background
object. Now, next, I'm going to click
this button to create a new camera and
then select the box next to the camera
to activate it. And now, holding alt and
using left mouse and middle mouse, we
can position this grid to roughly line
up with our road. That looks pretty good
to me. It doesn't have to be perfect. As
long as it's pretty close, we'll be able
to make it work in After Effects. Now,
back on Production Crate, we can
download that modern SUV we mentioned
earlier and bring it into our scene.
Now, we can drag the FBX of the render
crate model into our scene. If you just
let go of left mouse right here, it's
going to open this up in a new project.
But, if you hold shift before letting
go, it's going to add it into our
existing project. And that's just a
handy little tip if you're in cinema.
Now, press okay. And there's our car.
The first thing I'll say is this is just
a little bit too small. It's looking
more like a clown car, maybe. So, let's
grab our scale tool and just size this
up until it looks about how we imagine
it would need to be. Now, let's come
over here to this little cube, select
and hold to reveal all the primitives
and grab ourselves a plane. Still using
this scale tool, let's scale this plane
up a bunch. And we can also grab this
handle right here to extend it on its
Zaxis down the road. Now, if we click
this little square next to the camera we
created, we can start looking through in
the viewport again without affecting the
position of the camera that we set up
earlier. So, we can see now that the car
is clipping through the ground. So,
let's select our car in the object
stack, grab our move tool, and let's
push it up so the wheels aren't ghosting
through the ground anymore. Now, let's
reactivate our camera, and push the car
back in Zspace, way far away. Maybe
somewhere around here. Now, let's jump
back into After Effects and make some
decisions about the timing of our
animation in Cinema 4D. The first thing
I'm going to do is rightclick on our
composition, go to composition settings,
and check our frame rate. It's
23.976. So, we'll set our frame rate in
Cinema to 24 frames per second. In
Cinema 4D, if you hit control D, you'll
bring up the project settings where we
can change this FPS from 30 down to 24.
Now, back in After Effects, let's figure
out where we'll stop seeing our car.
Looks like probably around frame 85 is
the last time we'll see it. So, back in
cinema, let's change our timeline ending
from 72 to 85. And now, let's figure out
when the car should flip into the air.
So, it looks like Josiah shoots the gun.
And I imagine this little grenade will
fly out. So, let's give it a couple
frames to animate. We'll say the car
flips into the air on frame 63. If we
reference this number, if you're not
seeing this frame count in the corner
and instead you're seeing the time code,
you can toggle between those by
selecting this while holding control.
Now, back in Cinema 4D, let's go to the
very first frame, select our car, and
create a key frame by clicking this
little diamond next to the X, Y, and Z.
Let's go forward to frame 63 like we
decided on while checking our project in
After Effects. And let's drag our car
forward on the road to the place where
we want it to explode. Maybe around
right here. And let's create another key
frame for each. Now, also on frame 63,
I'm going to create key frames for the
rotation HP and B. Go forward to the
very end of our timeline. And let's move
the car forward up. And we'll rotate it.
Maybe something kind of like this. And
I'm actually going to push it up all the
way so it completely exits the frame.
Now create key frames for all of these.
And if we watch that back, it looks
pretty good, but there's something not
quite right about the way it flies up.
There's too much ease on the key frames.
We want this explosion to be more of a
jolt rather than a floating motion. So,
the way we're going to fix that is to
select our car body, rightclick, and go
to show fcurves. Now, this curve here on
the Z position is showing our car
starting at a dead stop and slowly
getting quicker as it goes down the
road. Instead, I'm going to select this
key frame and drag this bezier handle
down. So, that way the car is at a
constant speed the whole time. And I'm
also going to move this key frame down
and do the same on the other side. Now,
if we select the position Y key frame
and we zoom in here, holding alt and
right click on the mouse, we can see
that the car rises up very slowly. So,
let's select this key frame, holding
control, and drag this in like that. So,
that way it's a quick jolt when it flies
into the air. All right, that's looking
pretty good to me. In the original, I
did add a little bit more animation to
make the car kind of drift and try and
stop before it got impacted with the gun
as if the driver was reacting to what he
was seeing. But we'll go ahead and move
on from this place in the tutorial as
this is going to work just fine. Now,
the next thing we need to do is convert
all of these materials over to redshift
materials and build out the look of this
car inside of Cinema 4D. That's a pretty
lengthy process, so I'm not going to
cover everything about that in this
tutorial. But what I will say is that if
you are also using Cinema 4D, they have
a very comprehensive library over here
on the left that has lots of materials,
including these car paints, which is
what I used in the original example.
Now, also on Production Crate is a
collection of these HDRI to assist in
lighting your 3D scenes. So whether
you're in Blender, Cinema 4D, even
Element 3D, you'll be able to use these
to add details to reflections and
depending upon the capability of your
renderer, even add in shadows that can
match the lighting conditions of these
HDRIs. And to add an HDRI in Cinema 4D,
it's as simple as selecting this light
and holding left mouse and adding a dome
light. And then under the object tab, we
can add our downloaded HDRI here to the
path. So, I just quickly downloaded this
HDR7 from Production Crate. If we hit no
and we come up here to Redshift and
choose render view, we can hit this play
icon to launch our IPR and check out how
this is affecting the lighting in our
scene. Now, let's just assume you've got
your materials set up, your lighting is
ready to go, and it's time to render.
The way to do that is to reactivate your
camera. Come over here to the render
settings. Change the output width and
height to match the same resolution as
your composition. Change the frame rate
down to 24. Set current frame to all
frames. And then in the save tab, we can
give it an output destination. Make sure
you toggle on alpha channel. And then
set TIFF to open EXR. That's my
preferred render method out of Cinema
4D. Now, I know this particular section
of the tutorial was really fast and
didn't quite cover every button that we
had to push to make this effect work
coming out of cinema, but I tried to
keep it generic enough that if you
weren't diving into Cinema and you were
instead using Element or Blender, you
could follow these same principled steps
to achieve a similar result. If a Cinema
4D tutorial where we can cover
everything from materials to lighting to
render settings would be something that
interests you, definitely let me know
down in the comments below and we can
make a plan to maybe set something like
that up in the future. But with that
being said, once this is rendered out
and we have a car flipping out of frame
on alpha, we can go ahead and jump back
into After Effects and bring that in and
continue compositing. Now, here back in
After Effects, once you've imported your
car and you have this render, we can
drag it down here into our composition
above our car crash footage. You can
grab this corner and hold shift to scale
this up. Or a handy shortcut is to hit
Ctrl AltF to fit it to your frame
automatically. Now, next, we can grab
the pick whip and parent this to the
null that we created at the beginning of
this tutorial. And if we scrub through,
we can see it's nicely tracked and
flipping through the frame. The first
issue is that the color of this does not
quite match. So, let's add a levels
adjustment. And then we're going to go
through the red, green, and blue one at
a time to match this color. So, let's
click this button to change our window
to view just the red. And then change
the levels to affect just the red
accordingly. Let's drag this over to
brighten it up some. I'm looking at his
sweatshirt, which is the darkest part of
this frame. I want to make sure the car
is not any darker than that. So, now we
can toggle over to the green and the
green and do the same thing. And lastly,
the blue. And once we're done, we can
change this back to display the full
RGB. And I think that's looking pretty
good already. And now, finally, after
all this lengthy setup, it's time for us
to add in our production crate car crash
asset, which we already have imported
here. This footage crate crash SUV. So,
let's drag this down into the timeline
right above our car crash footage.
Initially, you'll notice it's flipping
the wrong direction. So, I'm going to
rightclick, go to transform, and choose
flip horizontally. Now, similar to what
we did in 3D, let's go ahead and scale
this up so it doesn't look like a clown
car. We'll drag it up to where it needs
to be on the road. Maybe something about
like that. And now, next, let's time
this up with when it needs to fly in.
I'm going to shift this over so that way
it's out of frame. Probably right around
here. And now, if we play this back, I
think the timing is working just fine.
Except our two biggest issues is that A,
this car is not tracked to the footage,
and B, it needs to go behind our main
actor, which means we're going to need
to do a little rotoscoping in a minute.
But let's start out with our tracking
first. So, let's go ahead and click this
I to hide our car for now, and then
select our footage. You'll notice that
there's already an instance of Mocha AE
on top of this. Now, Mocha can have
multiple different tracks inside of the
same effect, but in order to keep this
simple and separated from the beginning,
I'm instead going to duplicate the
footage by hitting Ctrl + D and then
deleting Mocha off the top copy. And
now, let's trim the footage in so it
only starts right around when we need it
to, probably about here. And then we can
add another instance of Mocha AE back
on. Just as before, click this big
button to launch Mocha. Press start and
let's bring the cursor all the way to
the end this time. Now grab your X
spline tool and let's draw a little
shape on the road somewhere where
there's a little bit of contrast. Maybe
here where we can see the overlap with
the line where it turns to dirt. And now
we can hit this track backwards button.
Now once that's finished, we can close
out of Mocha. Don't forget to press
save. And now let's create another new
null. So layer, new null object, select
your footage. Go to the tracking data
dropdown and click create track data.
Change the export option from corner pin
to transform. and then under the layer
export, change it from none to our new
null. Now we can click apply. Now let's
go to the very end of our timeline and
turn back on our car. I'm going to line
this up and place it roughly where I
want it to be in the road. Maybe
somewhere about here. And then we're
going to use the pick whip to parent
this to our new null. So now if we scrub
through it tracks quite nicely. Now
next, before we worry about making this
look cooler and matching our footage a
little bit better, let's go ahead and
take care of the roto, which is arguably
the most annoying part. So, select your
original footage. Hit Ctrl + D to
duplicate it one last time. We can go
ahead and delete Mocha AE out of the
effects panel. And then I'm also going
to click this button to solo it so it's
not trying to render anything else while
we're working on the roto. Now, we could
just do this middle section where the
car passes behind him. But I do think
we're going to want a little bit of the
beginning, too, where the explosion is
going to overlap. So, let's start our
roto right about here. So, after you've
trimmed your footage, let's come up here
to the toolbar and select our roto
brush. Make sure your resolution is set
to full and then double click your
footage to open it up where we can begin
rotoing. Now I'm going to use this tool
to draw little shapes over his body to
get him all selected. If at any point
you grab something that you don't need,
say part of the road, you can hold alt
to change the tool from a plus to a
minus, so you can start erasing parts
that you don't need. Once you've got him
selected, we're going to go frame by
frame, making sure that the selection
stays accurate as we go through this
footage. Rotobrush 3 does a really good
job of keeping the outline accurate,
even grabbing small details like the
strap on this helmet. But if at any
point it's losing something that it
needs to hang on to, say like this strap
here, we can just add that back in by
drawing a little bit more with this
tool. Now, once you're finished going
through making sure your roto is
accurate, you can click this button here
to freeze it so it's not trying to
update continuously in the background.
Now, once it's finished, you'll see it
turn this purplish blue color indicating
that it is frozen. So, we can jump back
into our composition, click this little
arrow to collapse the layer, and then we
can unsolo it. I'm going to hit enter on
the keyboard, and rename this to roto so
we can easily tell it apart from our
footage, and then drag this above both
of our car renders. Now, one other thing
I like to do on the roto layer is check
this toggle that says use motion blur.
And that just does a cool little
interpolation where it checks the
movement of the roto frame by frame and
softens out these edges just a little
bit. It's subtle, but if you turn it on
and off, you can see the difference that
it makes. Now, next, it's time to match
our car to our footage. So, similar to
the 3D render, I'm going to go ahead and
add a levels adjustment and then go to
the red channel and adjust just the red
of the levels. And we're going to go
through one at a time, same as before,
making sure that it roughly matches the
brightness of his sweatshirt. So, I'm
going to jump to green and then lastly
over to blue. And then we can switch
this back to RGB. The other thing I'll
point out is that the camera is actually
focused on our foreground actor, making
the background just a little bit blurry.
So, let's match our car using a camera
lens blur effect. By default, it's set
the blur radius to five, but I'm going
to turn that down to something maybe
close to about three. Now, if we scrub
through this a little bit, there's a
moment where this car is reflecting the
sky from its original render. And that
blue is not quite the same blue as our
sky. So, in order to combat that, I'm
going to add a hue and saturation
effect. and then just lower the
saturation some. Now, if we play this
back, I think it's already looking
pretty cool. So, I think it's time to
start adding in some of our detail
elements. The first of which is going to
be the explosion when the grenade hits
the front of the car and sends it
flying. For that, I'm going to use one
of these daytime explosion assets from
Production Crate. I think in the
original example, I grabbed this
Ultimate Explosion 14. So, let's
download that and bring it into our
project here. Back in After Effects,
I've got my Ultimate Explosion imported.
So, I'm going to drag it down here right
above our car render. And then I'm going
to slide it in the timeline so it starts
right at the moment when the car
explodes. Now, let's move it into
position. All right, that's looking
pretty cool. I think I'm going to toggle
on motion blur for this particular
asset. And then, just like with anything
else we import, we need to make sure it
matches the color. So, let's add another
levels adjustment. And for this, same as
before, I'm going to reference the dark
parts of his sweatshirt for the dark
parts of the explosion. And then I'm
going to keep an eye on the bright parts
of the sky for matching some of these
highlights. So, let's first go to the
red channel. We'll brighten up those
blacks. And then we'll bring down the
highlights till they're a little closer
to the sky. Now, same with the green,
brightening up the shadows and darkening
down the highlights. And lastly, the
blue. And now we can change this back to
RGB. And if we toggle on and off the
levels, that's looking much better. Now,
for the muzzle flash, it's a combination
of two things. First, one of these
aerial smoke bursts. And secondly, I
grabbed this energy magic burst and sped
it up quite a bit. So, let's download
both of those and bring them into our
project. So, now that I've got both
these imported, I'm going to go to the
moment where the muzzle flash should
happen, probably right here, and drag
out first our energy burst. Slide this
over so it starts right when he shoots.
Put it into position, right click, go to
time, and choose time stretch. And
change this down to 10. And now set the
transfer mode from normal to screen. And
lastly, add on a hue and saturation. So
we can change the master hue rotation to
make it a little bit more orange. That's
looking pretty good, but obviously needs
to be scaled down some. So let's do
that. And lastly, I'm going to throw on
a radial fast blur. Grab this CC radial
fast blur and change the amount from 50
to say maybe 85. Now let's go back to
the project panel and drag in our aerial
smoke burst right below the energy
burst. Now we can slide it on the
timeline so it lines up with when the
shot happens. Move this into position.
And then we can parent it to our null.
Now let's go ahead and add in our little
grenade that comes out and hits the car.
In order to do that, I'm just going to
click Ctrl Y on the keyboard to make a
new solid. Grab the pick whip and then
select one of these colors from the
shadow under his arm. Now I'm going to
grab the circular mask tool and draw a
little oblong shape. And change this
over to the rectangular mask tool and
chop off the back. Probably kind of like
that. Let's parent this to our null and
then scale it down and place it roughly
where it would come out of the gun at
the moment of the shot. So, I'd say
probably right here. And now, if we hit
P and then hold shift and select R and S
on the keyboard, we can reveal the
position, rotation, and scale and set
key frames for each of those. Next,
let's drag over our layer so it begins
at the start of those key frames and
then go forward to the moment where the
explosion starts right here. And let's
move our little pill shape down to the
base of the car and scale it down till
it's pretty much invisible. And I'm also
going to grab the rotation tool and
rotate it so it's facing down. Now that
we can see the path of our position key
frames, we can hold Ctrl Alt and then
click and drag on this first one to give
this a little bit of an arc. And then
let's toggle the switches and enable
motion blur. All right, I think that's
looking pretty cool right where it's at.
So let's go ahead and pre-ompose all of
our layers so we can add some camera
shake. If you hit Ctrl+ A while you're
inside your comp, it will automatically
select everything. Then you can hit
control shift C and name this composite
so it's all collapsed down into one
movable layer. On Production Crate,
there is a free script for camera shake
that you can download and install into
your After Effects project. Once your
script is installed, you'll find it here
under window at the very bottom.
Production create camera shake. There's
two basic options in here, shake and
jolt. Shake is going to affect the
entire timeline, whereas jolt is more of
a impact hit that affects just a small
section. So with jolt selected, I'm
going to go to the moment when the
explosion first happens and then click
the button that says jolt. That looks
pretty cool, but I think I want it to be
a little bit bigger. So I'm going to hit
control Z to undo that. And then let's
change our settings. I'm going to change
the amplitude from 1 to maybe 1.8. And
then maybe we can turn down the
frequency from 1 to maybe 6. and let's
hit jolt again. Now, for the sake of
time, let's go ahead and add some color
correction and call this about good. In
the original example, I did have a lot
more stock assets littered throughout
this piece, including some dirt
explosions, and some shock waves, some
dust hitting the camera, a few impact
elements when the car is bouncing. But
all of that's the same process of stuff
we already covered, just where you
import it, parent it to your null, and
then make sure you match the color. So,
let's go ahead and throw a L on here.
I'm going to add a new adjustment layer.
The shortcut for that is Ctrl Alt Y. And
then we're going to add the effect to
the adjustment layer called lummetry
color. Under the basic corrections, we
can add some contrast. Maybe warm it up
a little bit. Crush the blacks. Boost
the whites. Let's come to the creative
dropown and select one of these LUTs.
How about this Kodak one? I'll change
the intensity down to maybe 50%. And
that's looking pretty good to me. I'd
say the last thing that we need to do is
add some glow onto this explosion. So if
you grab your whole composite layer and
hit Ctrl + D, we can add a key light
effect to the top copy. Hide your
adjustment layer and then grab this
color picker and select the orange from
the explosion. Now change this from
final result to combined mat. And then
drop down the screen mat settings and
play with the clip white and clip black
until it's mostly just the orange that's
visible. Now add on an invert effect.
And lastly, let's throw on an instance
of production crates easy glow. I'm
going to change the plug-in preset to
sunset and then change the blend mode of
this layer from normal to screen. And if
we toggle on and off this layer, you can
see quite the difference that that's
made. Oh, and don't forget to turn your
adjustment layer back on. All right, and
I think that's looking pretty good as
is. So, let's go ahead and call this
good for today. Hopefully, you picked up
a trick or two and you learned
something. Please let me know in the
comments if you have any questions, and
I will see you guys in the next one.